My name is from Michael and I was born on January
22nd, 1932 in Scranton,
Pennsylvania. I was the son of an immigrant
family. My father and mother
were born in Italy. My father came here when he was
two years old. And his father was killed
in a mine accident. Mining? Yeah, cave-in. My
father was eight years old, and he was the oldest of
five children. And he had to quit school. These
were the days before welfare. the social and he uh
he had to he was the oldest and he had to quit school
and went to work as a breaker boy and what did the
breaker boy do they pick coal you know they would
help help miners put coal into those carts they
would work they would feed the animals you know the
mules that carry these cards just odd jobs, you
know, that men would probably do today, that
children
do today. And so he never finished
his education. He had a third grade education. He
was a very intelligent man, very sensitive man,
but never finished school. And I think his one goal
in life was to make sure that His son, and I was his
only son, went to college and didn't have to do what
he did. Sort of the classic immigrant story. My
grandfather and grandmother went to Germany, so I
kind of know what you're talking about. They
wanted to get their son educated, which they did.
And then he, of course, wanted to make sure we were
educated, which he did. I can remember ever since I
was a
little boy, five or six years old, my mother
stressing the importance of how I had to become
educated and go to college. So I was the first one in
our family to go to college. Where did you go? Tell
me, now you grew up in Scranton. I grew up in
Scranton, Pennsylvania.
went to college at Penn State. And did your father
stay in the mines while you were growing up? Yes, he
did. He became, when he was an adult, he got a better
job in the mines than what he had as a breaker boy. He
became a carpenter. And so he was the guy who
repaired The machinery that they used in
breakers, and I don't know if you know what a
breaker is, but a breaker is the place where they
refine the coal after they take it out of the
ground. And they have, you know, they put it
through treatment of various kinds of water, and
what else they do. They clean up the coal, and they
put it into certain sizes. So they had equipment
that had to be maintained, and he was a carpenter in
that breaker. And he would go into the mines when
they would cave in and shore them up and that sort of
thing. So they were kind of jack of all trades. They
were not fine carpenters, but people who built
heavy structures. And where did you go to school?
At undergraduate school at Penn State. And did you
have an assistantship, or work your way through,
or your family put you through? I had a
scholarship, and in those days, as you know, it was
not expensive to go to college, at a state school
particularly, but I had a scholarship. Yeah, I
imagine Penn State and A&M are very popular. Yeah,
they're sort of peer institutions, both land
grant institutions. And I was a biology major, and
in those days, My goal was to become a biology
professor. How about that? Yeah, I wanted to get a
PhD. That's interesting. I was an embryologist. I
went to graduate school at Ohio State. And after
getting my master's degree, before I got my
master's degree, I got married. I got married
while in graduate school. And you got your
master's at Ohio State?
Yeah. And while there, I met a woman in class that I
married, and I began to question whether I really
wanted to teach and do research. And then I think
getting married sort of also said to me, I better
get out and start earning a living instead of
staying at school. So I think those two factors
convinced me that I should probably start
working. And while teaching a biology laboratory
course, I used to talk to this one guy who was a
salesman who used to try to get me to adopt. lab
manuals that I was using in the course. And he got me
interested in publishing. He told me what he did.
And I always loved doing this. So as most people who
go into this profession, they're never trained
for it. But one of the things I have in common is a
love of books. And everyone I'm sure you've talked
to who's been in this business has said that. And I
was the same way. And so I became a textbook
salesman. With? the McMillan Company. It was my
first job in publishing. Now where were you based?
I was based in Michigan, and I worked in the state of
Michigan, the state of Ohio, and a third of the
state of Pennsylvania. So I traveled by place.
Where did you live in Michigan? Outside of
Detroit. And then I did that for about two and a half
years, and I got promoted to an acquisition
editorial in New York. So we moved from Michigan to
New York City. I moved to New Jersey, but I moved to
New York City, where I was an acquisitions editor.
And you'd be interested to know that I was a biology
acquisition for the college division. And one of
my predecessors was James Mitchell. No kidding. I
still remember to this day when I was going through
the files. I didn't know James Mitchell at that
time. And I started reading. He worked in biology.
He did a lot of things. But one of the things he did
was biology. And I remember reading letters that
he had written to various people. And he had, when
he was at Macmillan, he wrote, I think he started
Tales of the South Pacific, his first book. But he
got it published while he was at Macmillan. And
that was a success that he made. And he became, that
and his next book, which I can't remember what it
was, might have been the one, I'm not sure. He did
the, uh, three or four in the Asian. Yeah. Sayonara
was one. Yeah. And I was a Michigan fan. Yeah, I have
been, too. Although I've never read most of his
books, I must confess, including Hawaii. Well, I
read Tales of the South Pacific. I like Caravans.
Do you remember the old one, Caravans? And I like
the Polish one, Poland. The best book he wrote, in
my opinion, was Centennial. Centennial, yeah. I
thought it was a terrific book, mainly because I
was interested in the biology and the
anthropology and geology. He wrote a lot about it.
Anyway, he then left, he left Macmillan, and there
were a couple of free editors in between him and me,
but I was impressed with him. I thought he was a good
editor. He wrote very good letters. I remember he
was very conscientious, very earnest,
and so That's where I got my start. I started in the
commercial publishing business. And I had
various jobs in publishing. I went on from being an
acquisition
editor to being an editorial director. And at one
point, I got into marketing because I wanted to
learn the marketing side of the business. And my
last job in commercial publishing was director of
marketing. for Random House. How long did you stay
with McMillan?
I'm trying to think. Probably 11 years or so. Ten or
11 years. And then to Random House, still in New
York. Still in New York, yeah. And he was director
of marketing for the school and the college
divisions of Random House. And then from there, I
went into scholarly publishing. My first job was
in scholarly publishing. Why? Well, mainly
because I felt at that time that was the beginning
of the move in commercial publishing to become
like the movie business, where people wanted to do
blockbuster books. You had to do best-selling
college textbooks every time out, and I was
becoming concerned about that i wanted to do books
that i believed in not just books that made a lot of
money and so i had friends who had gone into
scholarly publishing and i remember talking to
them and decided that i would make a career change
and go into scholarly publishing and i became
director of teachers college press
Was that a new one? No, that has been around for a
long time. It's been an old, I'd say, when I was
there it celebrated its 50th anniversary. Oh, is
that right? Yeah, so it was started a long time ago.
It was unlike most scholarly publishers. It was a
professional publisher, not a scholarly
publisher. When did you make that move? I went
there in 1978.
Was the transition marked? It wasn't. It wasn't.
The only thing that was different was that you
could do books that you believed in and that
whether they made money or lost money was not a big
issue, as long as The press could live within its
budget. And that's one of the reasons I went, is
because I wanted to be able to do books that were
exciting to me, that made a contribution to me, and
that were not necessarily money makers. I was not
opposed to doing books that made money. But I
wanted to do books that, more importantly, made a
contribution to me. Now, are you still, do you
think, tuned in more to the science-type book as a
director, as an acquisitions editor, as a
whatever? A finance book? No, no, into science.
Oh, science. Biology, anything. You've left
that. I am, but I'm also very much interested in
history books and anthropology. No, I would say
that I'm not... So you never felt yourself being
tilted to the science mode in particular? No,
except I had most of my experience as an editor was
in that area. So I always felt more comfortable in
science because, first of all, I majored in it, and
secondly, I worked as an acquisitions editor. But
when I became a marketing manager, I also had to
deal with other books. And when I was a salesman, I
was dealing with other books, not just science
books. MacMillan was a general college
publisher, so they published from art to zoology.
And so I've always been exposed to other fields,
and I never felt that I was inadequate in other
fields or I didn't know what I was doing. What was
the size, roughly, of the Teachers College Press
in terms of product? Were they doing
textbook-type things? They were doing probably
three or four types of books. First of all, they
were doing scholarly books. They were doing
professional books, books for practicing
teachers. They were doing even school books. We
did reading books for elementary and secondary
school students. And so it was a broad-based
publisher in terms of the fields, not in terms of
the academic field, but in terms of the type of
books it published. It focused on education, but
various types of books within education.
Reference books, scholarly books, textbooks,
school books. One of the few, probably, not the
only one at the time, university presses that did
books for the school, public schools. There are
very few that do that. We did, for example, a
reading series called The Call of Crabs,
and they were supplementary reading books
designed for primary school. Very successful.
They did extraordinarily well. They competed
very effectively with . I'm wondering why
university professors can't paddle in those
waters . Well, some do now. For example, Yale does a
high school French program, but very few do it. I
know that. It seems to me that's a legitimate
thing. extension of the scholarly work. It could
be viewed that way. It's a different business and
it takes a lot of financial resources to play in
that game. But there are some people that can do it.
Yale's program is one of the better high school
language
programs. So you're with the Columbia University
from 78 until? 1983,
when I went to the University of Pennsylvania to
become director of WordPress. And I went there
because I was getting
I'm a little bored with just doing education
books. I wanted to do books in a wider variety of
fields. I wasn't bored with my job. I enjoyed my
job. Columbia was a great place to learn.
Columbia, let me tell you, compared to a state
university like A&M, is easier to work with. The
bureaucracy is about 10% of what you see in a state
university. It's much more entrepreneurial. You
can operate a university press better in a private
university than you can in a state university
because of all the regulations and bullshit. And
that has really increased massively, I think, in
the last 20 or 30 years. Yeah, I know. provost, and
associate provost, and assistants, and all these
state regulations. So that part is
quite different. But I was simply trying to say
that I enjoyed working at Columbia. It was a very
important part of my life. I learned the scholarly
business at Columbia. And then I went to Penn, and I
was at Penn between
1983 to 1995, when I came here. So I was up there
about 12 years. Now, OK. What was your first M
fighter, M flinger involvement with the M press?
Well, Mary Miller played a role in my coming here in
the sense that I had no intentions of coming to A&M.
I knew very little about A&M. Mary Miller sent me an
email telling me what a great place this was.
Saying that they had a wonderful facility,
tremendous support from their their
administration, and
great financial support as well. And why
shouldn't I think about applying for this job
here? And so she got me interested, and I said, I
don't know if I really want to go there. I'm very
happy at Penn. Although I had a strong interest in
the Southwest. And I was thinking of the days that
when I retire, I probably will retire in the
Southwest or the West, one of the two. And so I
decided to apply. And it was mainly Mary Miller who
got me interested. And where did she get you from? I
don't know. I'll ask her. Well, I think she may, now
that I think about it, she may have sent emails to
various people. I don't know. But anyway, I was one
of them. But you're on the list. I was one that got
it. And after I started thinking about it, and so I
sent in an application. That was when? Probably
in, yeah, I do. It was the fall of 1994. Now, did you
know what was happening at A&M at that particular
time? Did you have any kind of know? No. No, I knew
something about the list. I knew that it was
basically a regional publisher. I remember
someone asking me at the time, how do you view A&M?
Do you see it as a national publisher, an
international publisher, a regional publisher?
Without hesitation, I said regional. Not through
any great knowledge, because I didn't make it a...
And most people probably still make that
response. Yeah. Yeah. Well, the faculty,
particularly, I remember when I came here from
Arizona, this was a big concern. Jim Rosenheim was
on the search committee. Pam Hill was on the search
committee. Those guys were made very strong
points in those meetings. They probably made it
with each applicant. They made it with me. That
press had to reach a focus in the meeting, too. to
become a stronger publisher, with a stronger
reputation, a scholarly
publisher than just regional publishers. That's
a British historian speaking. Yes. Jim was
reflecting that. And a literature person or an
English person was reflecting the same thing.
Those guys have international albums. It's a
different world. That's all right. A different
world. And they are not Texas historians and don't
want I didn't want this press just to publish Texas
history books. So you come to A&M for an interview.
Right. I applied. I got a letter from Fred Heath,
and Fred Heath asked me to come down for an
interview. At that point, I gave very serious
thought to what I was doing. I didn't give it as much
thought. I said, that sounds like an interesting
place. I've never heard anyone rave so much as Mary
really did about it. It might be worth taking a look
at. But then when Fred contacted me, I gave very
serious thought to it. And I said, well, I probably
am not interested in going down there. But I've
come this far, so I probably should go and find out
for sure what it's like. And
you had never been here. I had been here. You had
been here. In 1962, I came to Texas A&M University,
stayed in a motel, to see an author of ours, a guy
that I had signed up to do an instructor biology
with, by the name of Larry Dillman.
He's now retired. Did you know? Yeah. He was a very
interesting guy. And I stayed in a hotel in Bryan. I
spent a week in here. It was in August of 1962. I'll
never forget it. And so that was my one time at A&M.
Now, I didn't spend much time here. I was here a day
or two just to see Larry and work with him because he
was having some problems with management. And we
worked on a manuscript for two days, I remember.
And then I got back on a plane and went back to New
York. Yeah. But I had been to A&M before. Yeah, we
were in the world in 62, and it wasn't in 92 or 94 or
whatever. And they were in that same building that
they're in right now, biology. You know, I go by
that building. Is that right? Yeah. I haven't been
inside it, but I see it from the outside. But I
remember seeing Larry in that building. We worked
all day in his office. And I also talked to a couple
of other A&M biology professors when I was here,
because I was always on the lookout for other
manuscripts as well. But I've been here. OK. So you
come to the interview. You're offered a job.
You're accepted. And at that point, what is your
perception of what you have done and of what this
press is? It's a regional press. Why are you
attracted to A&M? That's a very good question,
because when I told my boss that I was leaving to go
to A&M, he said, why would you want to go from
Pennsylvania to A&M? Because he saw it clearly as
going from a very, in his mind, a very prestigious
university to one that was less prestigious. I
think what convinced me, and I I marveled that I
made the decision myself at times. What convinced
me was the people that I met here, both on the
faculty and in the press. I've never been so
impressed with people that I felt were concerned,
interested, positive, intelligent, motivated,
and who were so enthusiastic about this place.
both the university and the press. And what
convinced me in the final analysis was the people.
The people that I met in the administration and the
people I met in the administration were the search
committee people, Fred Heath, Danny Parker, who
was on the search committee, Ham Hill, Jim
Rosenheim, whom I was very impressed with. I
remember Jim was one guy that It was very
interesting, because I admired him, I respected
him, I thought he was a wonderful person.
Mary Miller, I thought she was a special person.
Bill Perry, I thought Bill was terrific. So it was
the people that convinced me. Did you have any
contact with the President's transfer types? I
did not have any contact with him. See, that was the
first time, I think, a director came in without any
contact. I was interviewed by Bill Perry, the
search committee first, But then when the search
committee, I think, thought that I was a serious
candidate, I was interviewed by Bill Perry and
Charles Lee, who was an acting provost. You know,
the press reports into the provost's office. And
so those two guys were the people that I
interviewed. And I did not interview them. Which
was not the case when I interviewed at Columbia and
Penn. Both those jobs I reported to the provost.
But the president interviewed me in both places.
Sheldon Hackney interviewed me at Penn, and a guy
named Larry Kremenz interviewed me at Teachers
College and was president at Penn. And so that
struck me as
Not being strange, but I said, it sounds to me,
because I knew that the press reported to the
president one time, I felt that they were trying to
keep it within the provost's office. And I
remember talking to Charles Lee about it. And he
said, he was saying, do you do you feel okay about
reporting to the provost rather than to the
president? And I told him, I said, well, I had
always reported to the provost, but I felt that the
best situation for any press is to report directly
to the president. But it wasn't enough to deter me
or anything like that. I felt the people that I had
met were terrific people, and that was the basic
reasoning. I would say that this press and its
staff convinced me too. That's been a selling
point all the way through the whole system. But
that is interesting that the chancellor and our
president were really directly involved in
talking about that. They were not. But that didn't
bother me because I felt that there was a lot of
support. And I had taken a very hard look at the
financial side of this press. This press was in
very good shape financially. Yeah. One of the
things that many people in scholarly publishing
worry about, like colleagues at other university
presses, is the lack of support that they have from
the administration. This is a place that does not
have that. Despite the fact it doesn't report to
the president, it still has tremendous support,
and mainly because of what Frank did early on and
the fact that he reported to the president and got
support right from the very beginning from the
people at the top of the school district. And I
think that's been a very crucial factor in the
success of this class. If Frank reported to the
director of libraries or Robert Smith, this place
would not be the place that it is. He would have
never had the financial support. No, and he knew
that. He knew that instinctively, I'm sure. And in
a way, I think that probably was a mechanism to
avoid being too entangled with the faculty I'm not
sure how you report it at Texas, but I do know the
faculty really got his goat. And he may have seen
this as an opportunity to achieve a level of
independence and deal with the faculty at arm's
length instead. Probably. Now I feel differently
about, I don't know how Frank felt, and I wouldn't
make any judgments about it, but my feeling is that
a press director has to spend as much time wooing
the faculty as he does the administration. I feel
that the faculty is a very important support
structure for a university press. It didn't need
it here because of the support it had from the top.
Yeah, and I don't think Frank felt that, quite
frankly. The faculty were useful. I did. But they
could be a deterrent. Yeah, I do not feel that way.
And I think mainly because of where I've come from.
At both Columbia and Penn, the faculty is more of a
governing body than it is here. This university is
governed from the top down. The faculty does not
have nearly as much say. At Penn, the faculty had as
much say about whether something survived as the
president did. And so I have always been sensitive
to that, because I knew that without the support of
the faculty, the press would not have support. And
I worked as hard on convincing the faculty that we
were doing important things at Penn as I did
convincing my boss. Now, do you think that the fact
that the press was financially secure or had a
greater degree of security provided a stronger
incentive for more support from the
administration. I don't get the fact that that
would ever enter into their mind, really, the
financial status of the press. No, they don't
concern themselves with it. What they're
concerned about is reputation. Is the press
providing the kind of visibility to the
university and to them as individuals to get
published? And, you know, there are great parts of
this university's faculty, they don't give one
poot about the press because the science and
engineering people, the press is not a factor, but
the humanities people and the literature people,
I mean, those people are very dependent upon
university presses for tenure and promotion.
Exactly. In fact, I'm kind of leaning into this
chapter I'm working on now, is the idea that, in
fact, the climate for university presses has
increased tremendously because of the
imperative to publish. The publisher parish
commandment really promoted the expansion of
university presses. And that's part of that.
Good. So that fits. All right. Now, to answer that
first part of your question, which had to do with Do
you think that this press had the financial
underpinnings that was necessary to continue its
success? You raised the question something like
that. Different words but that's what you meant.
And I think one of the reasons I came here is because
I felt this press